The first metric and the RICE framework is
calculating the R or reach of a potential feature.
Reach refers to the number of people or customers
a feature can be expected to be used by in a set time period.
Because many companies follow a quarterly planning process,
a quarter three months is often used to calculate reach.
Yearly reach is also common.
As long as the same time period is used in all calculations,
the results will be comparable.
For example, if a new feature changes
a sign-up funnel and about 500 customers enter the sign-up funnel each month,
the reach of that feature will be 500 users times three months, or 1500.
In another example, if 2,000 users use
a certain feature per quarter and that feature would be changed,
the reach of the proposed update would be 2,000 for 2,000 customers per quarter.
The I in the RICE framework stands for impact.
Impact measures the effect a new feature is expected to
have on KPI's such as conversion rate or customer satisfaction.
Since the exact impact of a feature won't be known to launch,
impact scores can simply rank whether the feature is likely to have a huge,
medium or low impact on the users who interact with it.
For example, in this scale,
huge might be three,
medium two, and low one.
Though different companies may use different scales.
An example of the impact metric would be a feature that
customers would love and will likely greatly raise conversion.
This is potentially a huge impact,
so the impact score will be three.
In contrast, if you think customers will like the feature,
but that it won't have a big impact on bottom-line KPIs,
the impact score of the feature would be one.
The C in RICE stands for confidence.
Confidence describes how sure you are that your estimates are correct.
The more data you have about reach impact and effort,
the more confident you would be that those RICE metrics are correct.
Confidence can be considered on a scale from 100 percent very
high confidence to 50 percent low confidence or even lower.
An example of estimating confidence level would
be a feature you've done extensive research on,
including gathering customer feedback and customer usage data
and generating a detailed breakdown of required effort from the engineering team.
Because you know so much about this feature,
you can be confident in your reach, impact,
and effort scores therefore give this feature a high, 100 percent confidence.
A different example of estimating a confidence level would be if you've done
user research and gotten
engineering estimates about how difficult that will be to build the feature.
But the feature is very new to the product,
so quantitative data is limited.
You might only have medium confidence in your estimates.
Therefore, the feature will get a confidence score of 80 percent or 0.8.
The final E in RICE stands for effort.
Effort is the amount of time it will take to make
a feature go live from design to engineering,
to QA and launch.
The effort can be measured in person months,
or the work one person can do in a month.
One person-month means the work one person can do in a month,
and two person-months means the work one person can do in two months and so on.
An example of an effort measurement would be if a feature would
take about two weeks of design work if only one person worked on designing the project,
and then an additional six weeks for one person to build.
Since this feature would take about eight weeks if only one person worked on it,
we can put the effort of this feature at two for two person-months.
Another example would be if a feature had
no design elements and only required engineering time.
If the engineering team estimated one developer could build the feature in one month,
the effort score for this feature would be one for one person-month.
Once you've gathered the reach, impact,
confidence and effort scores,
you can calculate the RICE score for a feature.
A RICE score is the Reach number,
multiply it by the Impact number multiplied by the Confidence number.
That product is then divided by the Effort number.
For example, if a feature would reach 450 users,
have a massive impact,
a score of three, and we have high confidence in these estimates,
100 percent, and the effort to build a feature will take about two person months.
To get the rice score,
we'd first multiply the reach by impact by confidence numbers,
or 450 times 3 times 1 for a total of 1350.
Finally, we divide the product by the effort or two to get the RICE score.
In this example, the RICE scored the feature would be 675.
By comparing RICE scores,
features can be prioritized against one another.
The feature with the highest RICE score should be built first according to the framework.
Of course, there are many reasons why you
might work on a project with a lower score first.
One feature may be a dependency for another project,
or a feature with a lower RICE score may be required to
be built in the next month in order to land a huge customer.
The important thing is that with the scoring framework in place,
everyone at your company can clearly identify when tradeoffs like this are made.